“There’s something about math and formulas and algorithms that are fascinating” with this line Cedric Kiefer of Onformative reveals the man behind the curtain. At first glance it seems as if the work he and Julia Laub are indeed wizards conjuring mysterious moving creations. But as Cedric acknowledges the secret is for there for the taking, nestled in the recesses of your dusty high school arithmetic and physics books. On a graffiti cover lane located well within the border of the east side of Berlin, Onformative is a bastion of order. I’m sure anyone who is reading this article is aware of the burgeoning practice of generative design, of which Onformative is a leading practitioner. Following the legacy of islamic tile design !!!-EXAMPLE?-!!! of the 16th century, to Jean Arp’s chance collages !!!-EXAMPLE?-!!! to John Maedas work !!!-EXAMPLE?-!!! with computers at MIT’s Media Lab in the 1990’s, to the present day. Quite simply it’s a practice of creating rules, then following and refining those rules over and over.

!!!-GENERATIVE DESIGN CHART-!!!

As easy as the process is conceptually, like any skill, true mastery is exemplified by control. The work Kiefer and Laub create is often back by data, whether it be the visualization of dancer’s movements or information graphics for an annual report. To achieve the results they rely on creating their own tools primarily using the coding framework Processing. This is a crucial part in the story of Onformative, as the creation of tools is the crux of mankind.

Tools are a part of any discipline, and the tools of design have changed drastically over the past twenty years. Over the course of two decades our once coveted letraset, rapidographs, rubylith, t-squares, and cans of spraymount have all but become fetishized by those who yearn for the “good ol’ days.” I’ll be the first to admit I have an old soul, and relish in placing chunks of lead with letter forms one at a time to form words, sentences, paragraphs, stories. The limitiations and the problem solving that come from physically working (designing) is unparalleled. Decisions can be made simultaneously, the process of creating becomes an iterative sloppy mess careening towards a fuzzy goal. The learning curve was lower in a way, in that by the time any of us begin studying design, we have mastered use of our hands. If I want to draw a thicker line, there’s no need to no a combination of keys to hit, I can just break the tip of my pencil or change nibs on my pen. The limitations of the methods in the past were primarily physical. Lead is Lead. Film is Film. Yet because of their physical nature the skill for alterations were ones own hands and an imagination (or at the very least an accident, happy or not). But just as the stalwart who scoffed at phototype and clung to his cabinets of type. So to do most designers today, trudging on with same pretty much the same tools offered in Illustrator 88.

It’s Kiefer and Laub’s tools that shape the work they do, they fully embrace the main creative tool of the 21st century. This is the “roter Faden” (reoccuring theme) of Onformative’s work. With each new project comes a new tool, perhaps built on the back of the project before it but always shaped by an idea.

How could they possibly create the work of today using the tools of yesterday?