Peter Nencini is a designer hidden in plain sight. I first stumbled across Nencini’s work a number of years ago, by way of his “Make Do Type” typeface. A typeface made up of the most primal forms forms, lines, circles, squares, and triangles. Admittedly his typeface, was a catalyst for the theme of this zine. Yet his work is more than just studies in typography but rather a cacophony of mediums. Such as the Hand Werk Box series, whose visual language is distincly one of design, yet nestled in the context of an art diaorama reminiscent Joseph Cornell’s art boxes (albeit not as rustic). Each box is comprised of various bits of typography (via Scrabble tiles) patterns, tools (via school science lab suppliers), etc.

I’ve become a persistent follower of his personal blog, on which he catalogs his work and explorations. Very rarely are we the viewers given a peek behind the curtain as with Nencini’s own blog. With an average of 2.9 posts a month to chronicle his prolific output, it’s impressive that he is able to make time for everything else. Not to be outdone, Peter is critical of his own output “Here in this space, I’m hovering too much over each sentence — each postable image — and enjoying blurted thoughts published elsewhere with a 130 character cap.”

In 1992 he relocated to London to study at the Royal College of Art. After earning a masters in illustration in 1994, he ventured off to Brussels for a 3 year stint working as a designer for ?Levi’s European design team?. Eventually returning to London where he’s been ever since. [need more info to flush this out] He also contributes to Camberwell Illustrator and Key Ideas both of which stem from his participation as a tutor and lecturer at Camberwell College of Arts.

The type of work that Peter creates spreads the gamut and, in my opinion, challenges the definition of “designer.” Personally I am cautious of anyone who touts (not to say that he does) saddling the gap of artist and designer. In my experience and opinion designers typically make for terrible artists and artists make for terrible designers.
In spite of this I must admit, Peter Nencini’s work and approach satisfies both criteria of the art and design. Perhaps he is the elusive artist/designer unicorn? It can be said that art is a way of expressing the inexpressible, a way of creating from a place within that is taps the unconscious. Whereas, I would argue, design comes from a place of asking or answering (the attempt atleast) questions to address certain objectives. I won’t attempt to address the pitfalls that comprise the debate of “art vs. design” wihin this article, instead I would like to highlight the work that Peter does as the gray area between the two. The rigor of research and reference he pours into his work is that of an Jan Van Eyck painting. Yet the simple aesthetic of designers such as Emil Ruder or Max Bill are very obvious.

In lieu of producing a retrospective or cataloging Nencini’s work, I’ve opted to feature a smattering of his work, which not only embody the theme of this issue, but also show the breadth of the work he is doing in both artist and designer camps.

Make Do Type

Necini’s seminal work, Make Do Type, comes from his desire to create a typeface “as an extension of my hand ... a kind of basic geometry” The simple forms were inspired by the work of the afformentioned Max Bill’s “[Konkrete Kunst](http://)” poster, as well as Herbert Bayer’s “[Universal Alphabet](http://).” In addition I would also include Karel Martens as a reference. Karel Martens graphic explorations are made from found found objects, which he dips in ink and generates multiple iterations of prints. Make Do Type’s forms seem to come from found drafting instruments lying upon a table top. Unlike the found typography of [Paul Elliman](http://), Nencini’s letters are obviously crafted such as the various “g” and “r” characters. Each character is built upon an underlying rigid 2.5mm grid structure,whose limitations encourages iteration.

From the 26 letters of the latin alphabet through the placement of circles, squares, triangles, and lines he’s created over 192 unique characters and symbols. The really interesting bit is how he transcended the engineered-digital birth of the typeface and manufactured physical forms for use on letterpress or as stamps. The letterforms then become modular pieces and the negative space becomes positive space. Iteration of form and placement grows incrementally and more spontaneous “allow[ing] for growth and on-the-press decisions”

Twelve Intermediate Wall Works

One of Nencini’s forays into physical creations is a series of 12 wall works for [Partners & Spade](http://). He’s no stranger to physical work, as seen with Make Do Type and the letterpress exploration that stemmed from it. The use of the found object within Nencini’s pieces is inriguing. These mounted pieces are collages of found materials, but without feeling collage-y or scrapbook-y. Like most of Nencini’s works, he sets up a scaffolding of rules and executes iterations against those rules. In this case, each wall work is made up with a 40mm pegboard grid and within an overall size of 400mm. Upon this structure he connects various found bits such as, dowel rods, screws, leather, erasers, canvas, post-it notes, metal plates, plywood, etc. The end result is a family of sculptures connected by a lineage of rules.

Utilizing that of which is hidden in plain sight has enjoyed a revival over the past couple of years. For better or worse, this trend has woven it’s way into the zeitgeist of contemporary design, with many designers embracing the appearance of non-design(/art) as design(/art).

Embroidery

Recently Nencini has taken to producing embroidered works, either as commissions or a foray into a new medium. It’s no coincidence that his wife [Sally Nencini](http://) is a master embroiderer.

One such piece is the beautiful Flotta Chair, on which Mr. and Mrs. Nencini collaborated. The chair was comissioned by an artist couple and represents the life of two grandmothers on the small island of Flotta, located off the coast of Scotland. The pattern on the chair represents the lives of these two women and their children. Taking cues from clothing, the landscape, architecture, and flora of the island.

In addition to complicated time-involved pieces, such as the Flotta Chair, Nencini is using embroidery as a way sketching. As is typical with his approach, he has devised a structured system for these explorations. Using a standard 12oz. cloth tote bag as the delivery mechanism and a 40mm grid for the application of the adornments. Once again by embracing a simple set of limitations, such as the grid, availabilty of materials, and simple shapes he is able to generate a seemingly infinite number of patterns.